My job is to help people that have ideas (idea-people) to make sure that no one takes their ideas. The ideas that I work with usually are about things that doctors give to people to make them feel better, but I also work with ideas about computers.
    An idea-person, with my help, can make sure that he or she is the only one, in a given state in the world, who uses his/her idea (for a short time) and can make money from his/her ideas, so that he or she can come up with even more ideas. One of the ways I help the idea-people is by searching to make sure that the ideas are new and have never been written about before.
    If I find that an idea is not new, I can't really help the idea-person, as he can't then stop anyone from making or using his idea. If the idea is new, I can help the idea-person by writing an idea-paper which explains the idea.
    The idea paper is then sent to a state office that works on ideas, called a state-idea-office. The state-idea-office then checks to make sure that the idea is new. If the state office says that the idea is new and that no one in the field would have thought of the idea after reading all of what was written before the time I wrote the idea-paper and sent it to the state-idea-office, then the state-idea-office allows the idea-paper. Sometimes I have to write to or talk with the state-idea-office and tell them why the idea really is new and should be allowed.
    Once the idea-paper is allowed, the idea-person can stop other people from using or making his idea. He can also ask for money from a person who wants to use his idea. If someone uses his idea without the idea-person allowing, he can stop the person using it from using his idea.

    It takes a lot of train-food to move a train, but less food for each person on the train than in cars or on buses. If we can work out how to use less train-food, we can help our world live longer.

    A train-driving person can drive the train in four ways: full power (train goes faster), some power (train goes no faster and no slower), no power (train slows down), or counter-power (train slows down fast).

    If we can tell the train-driving person when to change between the four driving ways, we can lower the train-food needed to get to each stop on time. In real life we can save ten to twenty parts in one hundred bits of train-food.

    Our team uses numbers, letters and other strange marks to work out the least train-food needed to move a train to each stop on time. We show this to the train-driving person with a computer picture. The picture might change if the train-driving person is not doing what we told them, and so the train is going faster or slower than it should.

    We also study how the train should be driven if there are very high or low parts on the track, how more than one train should be driven, and how to decide the best time that each train should be at each stop to use least total train-food.
    

    All animals in the world are like a big family. Some animals are like brothers and sisters and other animals are like the children of each others aunts and uncles. In this big family, all animals fight with each other for food, space, water and stuff. I study if brother and sister animals fight more with each other than they do with the children of their aunt and uncle.

    To study this. I make not real worlds in computers. In these not real worlds I have many many not real animals and I make these not real animals fight a lot lot lot lot of times. I then see which animals fought the most. It's pretty cool.
    I study what happens to cats when people build things in places cats live. Some little cats stay close but bigs cats move far away. Big cats need lots of space and big animals to eat. People also need lots of space and big animals to eat. Big cats don't like to share space or food with people, they like to be left alone. Little cats use less space and can eat smaller things. Sometimes the places people grow food are good for the smaller things little cats can eat which lets little cats live closer to people. Some little cats are mean to other little cats. Over time, the mean cats take over the ground and night-time and make the other cats use the trees and the day-time. When people build lots of things, it can change the way all of the cats live with one another, and how mean they are to other cats. Cats are important because they eat lots of other animals in the woods. If cats move away or die because people build too many things, the things cats eat will grow out of control and eat all of the woods. We need to make sure people don't chase away all the cats so that the woods can be well for all people to use in the years to come.My work is about trees of low lands and how they could deal with cold in high places. Cold air bothers trees, they love hot spots, so they can not grow very well if they are in struggles. Trees are especially slow to respond in short time to changes in the ground. Little shifts could kill them soon and If we don't do something they will disappear in few years. So, I am interested in see what happen if they move to new colder places with human help because definitely they can't do alone in short time. We need more work in the field and not decide without facts, just staying in a desk.

    Our world is a big ball of rock. There are rocks on the ground and rocks under the ground. The deeper a rock is under the ground, the more everything above it presses down on it and the more it gets hot. This pressing and hot change the rocks deep inside our world so that they are different from the rocks on the ground, even if all the rocks are made of the same thing to start with.

    Some other worlds close to us in space are also balls of rock - like the small round thing that passes through the sky every night as it moves around us, and the red world that is the next one past us away from the Sun.

    I study how the rocks change deep inside our world and inside other worlds near us, as they get hot and are pressed on under ground. But how can I study this if I can't go hundreds of hundreds of feet under ground?

    I am able to grow a piece of what is down there by pressing hard hard hard on a very tiny piece of rock and making it hot at the same time. The rock responds and changes as if it were deep under ground. Then I can look at the tiny new rock I made and study what happened to it.

    -Lora (Experimentally studies rocks and minerals at high pressure and temperature in planetary interiors)
    I study how city people use water, often too much, and what that means for other living things who also live in cities. I study how many flying animals and green living things are able to live in the cities of the world. I find that fewer living things may be found inside cities than outside, but more than people expect. Many living things have found surprising ways to live, and do well, in cities besides people. I look for new and old ways for people to share the world with other living things.One big problem with stars is that we can look at them and see how bright they look to us, but we can't tell if they're not so bright and close by or really bright and far away. My work is on a type of star that gets brighter and then less bright over some time, usually less than a day or so, and how long these stars take to get bright can be matched with how bright they actually are. So if we look at the kind of stars that change how bright they are over time, we can tell how bright they really are. Then we can look at how bright they look to us and tell how far away they are.

    We want to know how the brain understands the world. When we look at things, we know what to do with them. We can imagine picking them up, throwing them around, what they feel like, what they sound like. We do not know how to give this power to things made by man.

    We try to understand this power by looking into the animal brain while it plays around in interesting worlds. When things in the world change, animals are surprised and look like they are trying to explain what happened. After that, they move in a different way when they expect the world may change. By looking into their brains before and after the animals change what they expect, we hope to learn more about the brain's power to understand worlds.

    When we try to look into the brain, we are faced with a big problem. The brain is made of many cells that work together. We can hear them working, but we can only listen to very few of them at a time. Because of this, we try to build better ways to listen to more cells so we can understand what they are working on.
    As you grow, the stuff your body is made of must be broken down and built up again so that you can get bigger. We study how this is done and how it is controlled. When you eat, your body uses things to break down the food to get what you need out of it. The body uses the same sort of thing to cut up the stuff we are made of so that it can then build it up again, new and better. We study one of the things that does this - how, where, and when it is made, how it is turned on and how it is turned off over time. If this thing is made somewhere it is not supposed to be made, or is made at the wrong time, or is turned on or off at the wrong time and place - bad things can happen which can make you sick. We study how cells know if they should make this stuff, and what inside and outside the cell causes it to be turned on or off. We also study how this goes wrong when you are sick and how we might be able to make it work as it should again.

    I study how tiny pieces of fire rocks get shot out of the ground into the sky. I am interested in how the smoke caused by the fire rocks sucks in air. Men many years ago thought that air moved straight into the smoke, where more air entered when the smoke was small and less entered when the smoke was big. Other people have shown that this is not true, but they still can't say exactly how the air enters the smoke.

    It is important to know how air enters the smoke since it allows the smoke to grow and knowing how air is sucked in lets us figure out how high the smoke will go. If enough air is sucked into the smoke, it will go up. If there is not enough air, the smoke will fall down. It is very important to figure out when this will happen because the way that people, houses, and other things get hurt changes if the smoke goes up or down.

    I plan to use a box of water to make small smoke lines like the smoke caused by the fire rocks shot out of the ground. Then I will get facts about how fast the air enters the smoke and where the air enters the smoke in three ways. First I will listen to under-water sounds from the smoke. Second I will look at moving pictures of the small smoke lines. Third I will send lines of light though the box of water to track how the smoke moves. Using what I learn, I will make an expression that tells how the smoke moves.
    

    Cells in your body sometimes grow too fast and make a big ball. This can make you sick, but what really makes you sick is when these cells move to another place in your body where they would not usually be found. As a student I looked at what would make those cells not only grow into a big ball in the part of a woman's body she uses to make food for a baby, but also would make them move to somewhere else. I studied things that allow the outside world to talk to the cell and what would happen inside the cell after this to change how it acts.

    Now I study and read many things about those big balls of cells, and I write about them for other people who work on them. I also ask very important people who work on this to write stories about what they work on, and then I help them fix the story and change it so it is better and easier to understand. The stories are then read by lots of people all over the world, both very important people who work on this and others who are studying and learning about it. I hope this will help us to fight the big balls of cells and make people better.
    
    Everyone knows how to add numbers together. Right? But sometimes we want to use things that are not numbers and that is hard. We wish we were adding numbers instead. So we came up with a thing called a . We wrote down all the things that numbers do when you add them. And we said: if something does all the things that numbers do when you add them, then that thing is a , and it might as well just be a number that you are adding to another number. This means if you want the answer to a problem about something-that-isn't-a-number, well, if you can figure out that the something is a , you can attack the problem using all the ideas you use when adding numbers. Sometimes, you can even turn your something into a number, find the answer to your problem, and then turn the answer back. Once you know how to do all this, all kinds of very strange problems are pretty easy to answer. A lot of these problems are about how things that are very very small act, so this is good if you want to figure out how the world works.

    Sometimes, we want to do more than *add* the things-that-are-not-numbers. We want to use  also, like 3 times 7. So we wrote out all the things that  does, and we said if you have something that does all the things numbers do when you add them, and can ALSO do all the things numbers do when you times them, that is a  (sometimes it is also a ). You can make even more problems about different things easy if you know the thing is a field.
    

    I build things that look at tiny living things in the water, so that we can study where they live the most. This study is important because these tiny living things help larger living things, all the way to land, to us. Now we know very little about these tiny living things.

    On land, the question is, where does this tree or that animal grow the most? What does it eat? In water, we also ask, do these tiny living things live deep, or near the top? Also, water moves around, carrying the tiny living things along. This makes it hard for us to look at these tiny living things on our own.

    The things we build have computers, are very good with numbers, and move around without getting tired. However, they are not able to see the tiny living things we care about on their own. So, using numbers, they remember what we know about where the tiny living things like to live. The things we build then move around the water on their own, carefully making note of what it can see. They then use computers and numbers to think. Does it look like the tiny living things might be around? If so, take a drink of water, saving it for us to look into later.

    They take many such drinks of water, over many hours, over a large place, and bring them back to us to look into. We use numbers to carefully note down which water has how many tiny living things. Then we give these numbers to the things we build, so that they also know using their computers what we just found out about where the tiny living things like to live.

    The things we build, now knowing more, continues bringing back water to us for us to study. Over days and years - until we understand a lot about the tiny living things we care about.
    Studies on a Computer of How Hard It Is to Get Two Really Tiny Things That We Write with an Add Sign After Their Name Stuck in Water: A number that means how hard you need to try to get one tiny thing to stay surrounded by a big crowd of other tiny things was added up for two tiny things that can't be broken up smaller (the kind you use to start a fire and the kind that you get when you drink the stuff that comes out of the animal with white and black spots) in the state where we write an add sign after their name, in water. The answers came from making a pretend box of it inside the computer and keeping track of a lot of numbers over 12000000 really small bits of a second and doing the thing where you get the area under a line. A force field (this one is named after a really tiny animal) was used that keeps track of where the add signs and take-away signs are inside the tiny things you can't break smaller. Three different sets of numbers to control how far the add signs and take-away signs can move were looked at next to each other, but no clear answer was found. The numbers using the force field with moving add signs and take-away signs were also looked at next to the numbers that came from last fall when the same two really tiny things were studied with a force field that keeps the add signs or take-away signs stuck in place (this force field is named after the hard stuff that comes from trees that died a long time ago). It was found that numbers from pretend boxes using one force field match the numbers people get when they actually do it with their hands for the tiny thing that you get from the black and white animal, but the pretend-box numbers are smaller than the doing-it-for-real numbers for the tiny thing you use to start fires. In the pretend boxes that use the other force field, the numbers match doing-it-for-real numbers for the tiny thing that you use to starts fires but do not match for the tiny thing you get by drinking the stuff from the black and white animal.

    In some cities, there is a lot of empty land because people have moved away and their homes have been taken down. Our work looks at how we can best use that empty land so that it makes water cleaner and helps people who still live in cities.

    We do this by trying to make the ground better for rain water, animals, and people in ways that don't take a lot of money. We make low spots on the empty land so rain water goes there, and then we make more space inside the ground to hold water. We add green stuff that grows--to clean air and water, to make homes for little living things, and to make empty land look prettier. We hope these changes make their way to bigger waters, making them better.

    Too, we work in places where some people still live, so they can enjoy the good things we make. Many of these people don't have a lot of money, yet, over many years, they have had to deal with much of the bad stuff that has happened in cities--water that can't be drunk, ground that makes them sick, bad stuff that other people leave on empty land. By making this land better, we hope that these people can feel better and enjoy their lives a bit more. We also hope these changes add money to their homes, so fewer houses become empty and less empty land is made over time.
    Care from others is good for us. It lets us know we can us be calm and our bodies can rest. Part of our brain is there to sense care from others and it responds by feeling safe. Some people don't like other people being nice and caring towards them though. It scares them. These people find it hard to stop being afraid and sad. They find it hard to be happy. Some people are trying to work out how to help them fix the part of their brain that responds to care, so that they can be calm and relax too. Imagining how care feels, is one way to get better at responding to it without fear and it helps people build up to enjoying real life care, then they can enjoy living with other people in the world.Computers can do a lot of things. They can use a lot of numbers to make pictures of whole worlds and give them life and see how they work. They can make stars too. I use lots of computers to make these number-pictures of really heavy old stars and even bigger dead stars, and see what happens when they run into each other. Usually, the big dead star will eat up the other star. The stars make big waves when they run into each other like this. We think we can see these waves here, if we look the right way. Our number-pictures show us what to look for. We want to see these waves because they will tell us more about what space is like.My job is to work out how women, who can't have a baby, feel. I do this so that we can have a better idea of how to help them manage the pain and live without something they want very much. Studying this also helps us understand how people think about and manage life when things go wrong, and which kinds of thinking and doing cause more or less pain for us. This is good stuff to know for anyone because we all have a brain to live with and life doesn't always go how we want.Computers can tell stories, but they can't see what goes on inside your head; more to the point, a computer can't see what you remember, which is actually a key part of how well you enjoy a story. My work deals with finding out what you remember from a story as you are reading it. I will then get a computer to track what you remember, so it can change the story on the fly to give you a great one. My work can be used in both usual stories, and in games.

    Computers can take pictures. Computers work well with numbers. This means that if a picture is taken with numbers, then a computer can see things. But computers do not see things like we do. The place I work in makes computers see with numbers. The computers that see with numbers can look at things as they are being made and help the people who make them do it with less problems.

    Sometimes, people do not get how the computer sees. This makes the people mad because they can't make the computer see what they want. When they get mad, they call my office and I help them get how the computer sees. After I talk to them, they are not mad any more.
    

    I study the brain of a jumping animal that lives in the water and makes noise. I want to find out how it makes that noise. So I take out its brain and put the brain in a cup of sweet water that has air in it (so can eat and breathe). If I put in a kind of brain water and then listen very hard with a computer I can hear it trying to make the noise!

    That is really cool, but I still don't know how it's making the noise. Other people have done things that help me understand. One person put dark water in the noise-making part of the animal to see where in the brain the pretend noise is coming from. This dark water went inside the brain cells that made the noise making part go. They put in more dark water, and saw that part they found liked to talk with a different part, which liked to talk to the first part at the same time.

    (The brain is a very confusing place! Many parts talk to other parts and it's hard to keep track of what they all are saying. For making pretend noise, it only needs these two parts. That makes studying this a lot easier!)

    Cells in the second part talk and get quiet fast all at the same time (about as fast as air-lights go on and off). They do this in bursts, and are also able to all stop at the end of the burst at the same time. It sounds just like the pretend noise! But if we cut the brain between the two parts, it still tries to talk in bursts but it doesn't sound like anything anymore. This tells us that to talk and get quiet at the same time, the second part needs to be able to hear the first part. But the second part doesn't need to hear anything else to talk in bursts!

    (I think it has gotten confused and the cells can't talk at the same time because they don't have the first part telling them when it's fine to say stuff. The first part might be like one of those red and green lights that tell cars to stop and go, only it gets them all to go at the same time.)

    The problem is, since cells in the second part also talk to each other, we don't know who is telling them the things we see them hear. I am going to try to cut the brain in half while watching what cells in the second part are hearing. The stuff they stop hearing after I cut the brain in half will probably be the stuff the first part was telling them, and the stuff they keep hearing will be the stuff they're telling themselves. If it works, it will answer both how they get quiet and loud really fast all at the same time AND how they all know when to end their burst!

    The biggest problem is that I am running out of time to learn how to listen to the very small cells and write my final big paper for college, and I keep not doing these things because the computer has simple word boxes which are much more fun to write in than the big word boxes.

    (Also, I have to kill the jumping animals in order to find out these things, and that makes me sad.)
    I look at only the really tiny parts that make up our world. Their name comes from another word for something you can not break in half, because people thought they were the smallest parts in the world and no one could break them. However, we now know that we can break the parts into two or more even smaller pieces. When we do so, we get power out of it. People have used this to keep our lights burning and also for very bad stuff. If we knew a bit more about how these small parts break, we could get even more power out of them.
    It is really hard to find out more about what is going on with those tiny things, because they are too small to see and everything happens very fast.
    My friends and I have a really cool black box full of interesting stuff. We use it to take a picture of what happens when we throw small fast things at other small things that then break in half. My job is to know what those halves - the new pieces - are and how fast they fly away. This way I try to explain what happened when the one small piece hit the bigger small piece.
    Once I know what was going on, other people will be able to make a lot of power while keeping the air clean, which could be an answer to one of our world's biggest problems.Some people learn by trying things out. Some people learn by thinking very hard. I make a world inside a computer the way people think the world works, and then try things out, to see if we are thinking right.I study how the brain makes sense of the world and brings it all together to form the sense of our self. In more words, I study how one kind of brain cell works with other cells of the same kind to keep our senses arriving at the same time, making a complete mind picture of our world. This group of cells are all over the brain and work together to act like a tight, single part of a brain, rather than many smaller parts. This team of cells fire together and line up all the other kinds of cells that fire in the brain, and are an important part of normal thinking. In some people who have a sick brain, these cells don't work together as well as they usually do. I would like to learn more about how this one team of cells manage all the other cells, and how we can help the people with sick brains so they can think better, be happier, and have a more complete sense of their world.Our question is how cells respond to outside changes and continue living. To answer this, we use cells that grow fast and are easy to work with. We let the cells to meet the changes and try to understand what is happening inside them. We study what is happening with the different steps that are important to respond to the changes
    and allow the cells continue living. This is important because understanding how the body cells respond to changes is the first step to understand how to deal with changes like the things that make you feel sick.

    We study a type of protein that cannot be destroyed and accumulates in the brain of people and animals. When this happens neurons die and finally the sick person or animal goes mad and also dies. No treatment or drugs exist for this disease.

    The reason this protein accumulates is because it changes its original shape into a weird shape that keeps it from being destroyed. This change of shape might happen out of the blue or be inherited or because one eats food with the bad-shaped protein in it, such as when someone eats meat of a mad cow.
    You build a computer with a body, and ask a it to move in the world; how does it know what to do? I study ways to let it own its body. The key is to allow the computer to dream about the world. The computer looks at the state of the world and its own body, and uses its dreams to plan the best thing to do next. since the dream and the real world probably do not agree, this planning needs to happen every small time step, so that the problem never gets too big.

    Mothers and fathers pass their body plan to their children. These plans are written in a large number of letters, and tell each kid's body how to live. Every person has a different set of letters.

    One reason why every person has a different set of letters is because sometimes, but not very often, the letters get changed to a different letter before they get into the children. Sometimes these are considered wrong letters, but sometimes they are just considered different letters. When the wrong or different letters happen, sometimes a person's body can get sick.

    There is another reason why every person has a different set of letters. Half of the letters come from mom and half from dad, but you don't know which letters are in each half.

    Even when the letters don't get changed, sometimes they can make people's bodies sick or different than most other people. We try to look for the things which make people's bodies sick or different that we think happens more in their family than in other families, and we try to find out which letters caused it.

    We find families who are sick or different in these ways, and we ask them to share their letters. We want to read all the letters, but there are so many of them, so it takes money and time. Because of this, sometimes we decide to look at only the letters which we know have a job in the body. The other letters may have jobs in the body, but we don't know what they do yet.

    We read the letters with a lot of hard work by people and computers. We want to see which letters the sick families have that the not sick families don't have. It would take too much time for a person to check each letter. Instead, we ask computers to check for each group of letters. Computers are not perfect either - we are making new ways of asking the computers to find the letters we are looking for.

    When we find the letters we try to make stories that tell why the letters are making people sick, to help us all understand it. We share the stories with the people. The stories help in many ways. They can help later, to find out why someone is sick or different. They can also help open our minds to ways to help people who are sick or different.
    

    The thing we make is a round box with living stuff in it, and a turning thing to move the stuff around. The living stuff is made of really little animals, like tiny trees that live in water. We put in the stuff that the living stuff eats a little at a time, so that how much of that stuff is in the round box stays the same, and we take out the stuff the living stuff likes to make at the same same. We make the whole thing warm and put air in it to keep the living stuff happy. Sometimes the living stuff needs light, so we make the round box out of glass.

    We do all this stuff because the living stuff in the round box likes to eat a bad kind of air. This is the kind of air that makes the world get hotter. When it eats this air, it turns the air into sweet food. We can turn that sweet food into a thing we can burn in our cars and use to make lights in houses.
    

    I've studied the stuff that holds our cells together; stuff that stops us from falling into pieces. Some of this stuff is tiny but strong and is made and ordered by cells in our body. This stuff is found between all cells. It is found in our eyes. It is even found in our hair. As we grow old this stuff breaks down and doesn't hold us as well as it used to when we were young.

    Even though the body makes this stuff, people can make simple types of this stuff too, to hold cells together. We search for ways to use this stuff to fix the body because it is safe and is already found in the body. Cells can grow on and in this stuff. It can stick cells to cell food or cells to cell parts so that a wound can close fast. We make simple types of this stuff to control cell changes and change how the cell works with other cells. We do this by making this stuff so that it holds other stuff that controls cells. This is hard work but can save lives.
    

    More and more people are moving into houses and towns built near the woods, where the trees meet the more open and controlled spaces we usually call home. This is a problem because trees burn pretty easily, especially during the hot, dry days that are becoming  in this part of the world. Sometimes houses or whole towns burn down when the woods catch on fire.

    For over one-hundred years we've tried to fix this problem by not letting the woods burn at all; we stopped all fires as soon as possible after they started. But now we understand that this approach has actually ended up hurting us, because now there are lots more dead trees, large sticks, and young trees in the woods...all waiting to burn. These things have built up over time, because there have been no small, safe fires to burn them away. Now when we have fires, they are the large, hot kind that reach all the way to the tops of the trees, rather than the small, safer kind that stay closer to the ground and take care of the woods. Although we try very hard, we can't really stop the large fires. But if we could go back to the smaller fires we would have an easier time dealing with them, we could stay safer, and we would could less money on fire-stopping.

    I study these towns near the woods, and look at what they can do to make it safer for their houses and people. There are many ideas, like taking all the big sticks and dead trees out of the woods by hand; starting small fires during safe times to clean up the woods; learning how to build homes that burn less easily; keeping the town ready so fire men and women can more easily move their huge cars and find water; and talking to one another so that if a large fire happens the town can get better again quickly, and learn how to be safer next time.
    fire adapted communities,

    Along time ago, ice fell from the sky in large numbers in high rock areas. When lots of ice falls it builds up. When a lot of ice has built up in high rock areas it moves down to low areas. As the ice moves it picks up rocks and carries them. When the ice stops moving it drops the rocks in a group in front of the ice.

    My work looked at the rocks moved by ice that fell from the sky in these high rock areas. I wanted to know when the last time this ice fell from the sky and moved from the high rock areas to low rock areas. This would help people to understand why less ice is falling from the sky in high rock areas today.

    I did this by figuring out when the ice moved and dropped the rocks. You can learn when these rocks were dropped by figuring out how many tiny pieces of a type of matter built up on a rock. Things like light come from space and hit the rocks. This caused the tiny pieces to build up. By knowing how quickly the tiny pieces build up on the rock, you can figure out how long the rock has been sitting in that position. The time that the rock was sitting in the position is the assumed to be the last time the ice dropped the rocks before the ice was gone.
    My job is to tell the computer to do things using words a computer understands. People want the computer to do some things for them so some part of their lives are easier, faster, or just better. My job is turning people's wishes into words a computer can understand and do very well. Most times, there are many different ways to tell the computer what to do, and some ways are better than others. Computers will do exactly what you tell it to do, which is a good thing if you are thinking like your computer and a bad thing if you are not. Thinking about how you will tell the computer to do something can be both hard and fun. Sometimes, the words you tell the computer are not quite right, and you have to figure out why. It's also interesting to work with other computer word people and figure out how to make our words work well together.

    Most of the time you see people using their voices to talk. Those talking voices can be written down as words on paper. Then we can read those talking voices. We put those papers together and call them books.

    But some people can't hear! What do those people do? They don't use their voices. They use their hands to talk to each other. But those talking hands can't be written down on paper yet. How do we make books if we can't write down talking hands?

    Those people use computers to make movies of talking hands. Those movies can be shared with many other people, like books are shared with many other people. But movies are not books.

    Now computers can make books too. We don't need paper anymore. So we can put both words and movies in the computer. People can then decide to read words of talking voices, or watch movies of talking hands.

    If there is a good story in the computer, kids can pick to read the story or watch the story!
    

    My job is to look at the sun. But, I do not look at the normal light that we see every day, I look at a different kind of light which is much stronger and is used by doctors to look inside your body. The sun makes this light only sometimes and it is hard to tell when it is going to happen. It is very important to know how this light is made, because if there is a man in space when the light comes from the sun, he is going to have a bad time.

    As the sun goes around, it builds up a kind of power inside it. When enough power is built up, lines of this power can go up to the outer part of the sun and let out a big sudden burst of light and hot stuff. The hot stuff can hit us and make space men have a bad time, but it can also break the space things we put up into space so that we could make phone calls and find out where we are. This is another reason why understanding these bursts is a good idea.

    The kind of light that I look at is only made during these sun bursts. When the power lines break at the outer layer of the sun, tiny things are made go very very fast. Sometimes they can even get close to how fast light goes. These tiny things are pushed in all directions, but many of them go down back into the sun and hit a place where there are slightly bigger things that are all very close together. The tiny things hit into this place very hard and make it very hot, but also make the type of light I like to look at.

    Because this type of light is made straight away when the tiny things hit their bigger friends, I am able to look at the light and make a good guess about how fast all the tiny things were going. This also gives me an idea about what made them go so fast, and what they did on their way down before they hit their bigger friends. If I look at enough of these bursts, I hope I will be able to make a good guess on when to give space men a warning so they have a good time in space.
    

    It is very hard to understand how new ideas for things have made people's life different; ideas and things we think of as old come from older ideas that used to be new and cool. Phones and computers are good things that have changed the world a lot, and they are all over the place, but we only sort of understand how they change they world. They change things a lot! But that change doesn't just HAPPEN. All new ideas and things are part of a LOT of OTHER things that join up and make the world we're used to seeing work like it does. Some of the ways that ideas and things change the world come from the way people think the world works, some come from the way people live and work together in different places, or even the way we think about the new idea and how to make it work.

    I try to understand how a new idea or thing, like phones and computers, really WORK in real world situations, how they change the world, from the approach of someone who makes new things and comes up with new ideas. A very bright guy said that asking questions and trying to make new things is like how everyone has a way to make amazing things happen... but that same way also makes very bad things happen. My thought is Right now a lot of new ideas could make amazing things happen very soon. The US Space Team are really trying to make space cars that can go to other stars; People are changing tiny living things so that they can do anything we want. A hundred hundred hundred other new ideas. But right now the world is in trouble, because of how people have acted.

    The question, then, is how do we bring these really cool new ideas into the world in a way that makes amazing things happen, to deal with the problems that are coming to a head now around the world, and to make something better for us as people together. What do these new ideas mean for the world, and also, how can I, as somehow who wants to make cool stuff, act to make a better world?

    That's the big question I think about. Inside that question, I study the way we make power and get it to people and things, and the way new ideas and new things change the way we set that stuff up. Everything we do uses power, from moving, seeing or thinking, to lighting things, making food, or flying places, and all the ways we power that stuff is joined up in hard to understand ways. So I try to figure out how new ideas for making more power or using power a lot better change everything else, and how different people will be changed in different ways, and how we can make those changes good for everyone. We have a lot of good ideas, but they don't work very well with the way we have been making and using power for a long time, and they change things in different ways in places with lots of money like the US, than in places which don't have a lot of money. We try to come up with new ways to join up things so that really cool new kinds of power can get to people in really good ways, and then use those new power ways in real places around the world.
    

    A little part of everything is really in every place at once, especially very little light things. If a wall is not very thick at all and some thing can be on either side of it and the thing gets close to the wall, sometimes that thing just shows up on the other side of the wall from where it started. Tiny things like that have stuff on them that makes forces on other things. They take some of that stuff through the wall with them.

    We study how little things go through walls and how to make the tiny walls that more tiny things can go through and so that they can take more stuff with them when they go. If the tiny things can take more stuff through, we can use that to make better computers some day.
    

    How should I live? What should I do in life? These are questions we all have to answer. Because we all have to live some way or the other. Big and small questions about the right way of doing things come up all the time. And our life as a whole is always our own attempt to answer the question about a good way of living.

    Still many people don't think much about these questions. They just live like they are supposed to live. They live like they believe other people would want them to live. And believe in things that people around them believe in. So they let other people decide about their lives.

    But there are some people who feel that they must try to answer these questions. Who stop and ask: Should I really believe this? Should I really live like this? And they will not go on, before they know the answer. They are willing to go deeper and deeper and spend a lot of time with these questions. In fact, they can spend their whole life trying to figure out something other people think is not interesting at all.

    In the best case, these people can find new answers to life's big questions. Answers that open people's eyes and change the way they look at their lives. This could change the way people are living. In the best case, these answers can help all of us to live our lives better.

    This is what I do for work. I try to find new ways of thinking that will make people live a better life.
    

    I work on finding good ways for people to work (or play or just get to know each other) using computers. you might think you know all about this if you already have a lot of  on your computer. but when a business is trying to help their people work together, they need to know what to do to help. they have to know whether a game is just for fun or can help people work. and when a school wants to help students learn, they have the same questions.

    What I do is try things out, watch to see what happens, and explain the ways in which work or learning was done, noting especially whether it was done better or worse.
    

    A 'census' happens when we ask all the people in the land to answer some questions and then add up all the answers. One of the things that I do at work is help people to use the numbers that we find when we add everything up. In this land ('United_Kingdom'), we ask these questions every ten years. We have been doing this for more than two hundred years.

    We can use the answers to find out how many people there are: how many men, how many women, how many children and so on. The questions cover things like the jobs that people do, the houses that they live in, and the people that they live with. So, we can find out how many people do different sorts of jobs, and what different sorts of people do the same job. We also ask questions about how well people did at school, about whether they look after other people and about whether they are sick or well.

    When we check the answers, we can do things like looking at the number of different sorts of people who do a job. Sometimes there are less women in some jobs than we would expect, sometimes less people who believe in different Gods, and sometimes less people with different colored skin. If we find things like this we worry that different people are not all being given the same chances.

    When I said that there might be less people who believe in different Gods doing a job than we would expect, how do we know how many we should expect? We can find out by looking at how many people there are in each group in all the people, and then seeing if there is the same share in the people doing each job. If we did not ask all the people, we might just have to guess about this.

    A question that I am interested in asks people about where they used to live a year ago. This lets us see how many people have changed the place that they live in, and how they have all moved about. This helps us to decide where we might need to build new schools or hospitals or other things. If lots of people with children have moved to a place, then we might need to build a new school there.

    One of the most interesting things that we can do is find the answers that a person made the last time that they answered the questions, and the answers that the same person gave ten years before. We can also look at their answers from ten years before that, and ten years before that, and even ten years before that! We will only find all of their answers if they are old enough, of course. If they are younger, or if they came to this land not many years ago, we will only find some of their answers. When we look at all these answers from different times, we can start to understand how things that people did a long time ago - such as the job that they did, or how well they did at school, or what their family was like or the jobs that their parents did - might change the way that their life turned out as they got older.

    We can join the answers from now and from ten years ago (and earlier) for a small group of people. You and I do not know if we are in this group. The joined up answers give a huge number of facts about a person - so many that it might be easy to work out who that person is, even though we are not told their name or where they live. That is why it is important that people do not know if they are in this small group, and also why the actual numbers have to be kept under lock and key! People who use the numbers for this small group are told what they can and can not tell other people: they must make a serious promise not to tell things that might let others work out the name of someone in the small group.

    After one hundred years have gone past, all the answers that people gave can be shown to everyone. People can find out very interesting things that happened to their family long before anyone who is living now can remember.

    Some of the people who run this land have said that they don't think that we should have carry on asking these questions to all the people. One reason for this is that it takes a lot of money to ask all the people lots of questions - paper forms have to be sent to all the houses, and other people have to read all the completed forms, and type the answers into a computer. It is true that it takes a lot of money, but it is important to remember that although we ask the questions every ten years, we keep on using the answers for a long time after. A lot of the ways that we use the answers are to try to make sure that we save money at other times: such as not building a new school when there are not enough children to go to it.

    If we did not ask questions of all the people, what could we do instead? In some lands, they do not ask these questions. However in those lands they usually have a computer that keeps track of people, so that they always know how many different sorts of people there are in each place. In this land, we do not have a computer like that, so we can not use it in the same way. Sometimes, we ask questions to a group of people, instead of all the people. If that group has the same share of different sorts of people that we can see in all the people, then we think that the answers would be the same for all the people. It saves a lot of money to only ask questions to a group of people. But there is a problem with this! How do we know that the group of people has the same share of different sorts of people as there are in all the people? This is part of the same problem that I mentioned above, when we worry about whether people have the same chances. We need to ask questions to all the people from time to time to make sure that we still know how many different sorts of people there are!
    

    What makes things stick together (or not stick together) and what are things made from? In every day life, there are many ways to make things stick together and many things to make things from. What happens, though, when things get really, really small? I study how things stick together and the things themselves in the smallest space we know how to make.

    It turns out we need only three forces to explain all sticking together (or not sticking together) and only around 20 different things. Could we figure out a way to make this number of forces even smaller, maybe one or two forces? Can we make the number of things smaller? To study this we run small things into each other when they are moving almost as fast as light, and watch what comes out.

    It also turns out this things running into each other when moving as fast as light happens to be close to the situation as at the start of time. So, on the side, we also study what the world might have looked like then.
    

    'Air Distillation'

    For my job, I turn air into the different parts that make air up. We make the part of air you can breathe, and two parts of air you shouldn't breathe, because your body can really only use the one part that you can breathe. All three air parts are used for lots of things, so it's good that we can make the air parts go away from each other. So, how do we do that?

    Well, first we suck the air into a thing that turns around and around really fast. Turning around so fast makes the air get hot. The hot air goes through a big box that has cold air parts coming out of it. The cold air parts make the hot air get colder, and the hot air makes the cold air parts get warm enough to do things with them.

    The air is cold after going through the box; so cold that it's almost wet like water. The cold wet air goes into the bottom of the thing that makes the air turn into its parts. Here's where it starts to get hard. The part of air you can't breathe go away from the rest of the wet air parts because it needs to be colder than the other wet air parts to stay wet. So, it turns into a really light air part that goes to the top of the thing that makes the air parts go away from each other and leaves through the box we talked about.

    As the light air part you can't breathe leaves, the wet air parts still stuck in the thing that makes the air parts go away from each other fall down until at the bottom, the air part you can breathe turns into very cold wet stuff.

    Here's where it gets way harder. A little bit of the light stuff you can't breathe goes through a thing under the wet stuff you can breath. Since the light stuff you can't breathe is warmer than the wet stuff you can breathe, it makes the wet stuff you can breathe turn into light stuff you can breathe. The light stuff you can breathe then goes out of the box we were talking about. The light stuff you can't breathe that was going under the wet stuff you can breathe gets colder than it was because the wet stuff is very cold. So the light stuff you can't breath turns back into the wet stuff you can't breath, and goes all the way to the top of the thing that makes the air parts go away from each other, and falls down to the bottom. The falling down makes it turn back into light stuff you can't breath, but the falling also makes the wet stuff you can breathe much colder so it stays wet longer until there's lots of it.

    Everything in the world can be turned into wet stuff, or really light stuff. You just need to know how hot or cold to make it. The stuff that a car is made out of need a lot of hot to make it wet. The stuff you breathe just needs a lot of cold. Most stuff that is like the stuff we breathe, you know the really light stuff that you usually can't see, needs a lot of cold to make it wet. That's how 'distillation' works.
    

    I study what makes up space and time by imagining what happens when very small things hit each other. It turns out that very different forces act the same when you look at them in the right way. It is funny, but the least strong force brings together heavy things and really only acts (in a way we can watch) on big things. The strongest force that we know about keeps together the middle of the smallest things we can see. It is so strong that it can really only act on things very close together - if you pull too far, it just makes new things that are close together. It turns out that the thing carrying the least strong force acts just like a pair of the things carrying the strongest force.

    This job of imagining what happens when very small things hit each other used to be very hard and would take a long time. Part of the reason is because we are talking about the chances of things happening. We have made it easier by cutting the big problem into lots of easy little problems that we fix and carefully stick together. This way of doing things has a strange name but it means something nice: the chances of things happening always adds up to one.
    We are all made of the same tiny stuff, but every one of us has small changes to that stuff that makes us different. Sometimes those changes, which are there from when we first come into the world, cause problems. They can make different parts of us not work well. I study one of those changes that causes a problem in the brain. People with this change can't make an important tiny brain-thing. In everyone else, this really tiny brain-thing helps the tiny parts of our brain decide what to make. If our brain can't make the right things, at the right time, we can't think very well! I want to understand how this tiny brain-thing controls what gets made in the tiny parts of our brain. Maybe if I figure that out, I can help the people who don't make the tiny-brain thing so that they can think well anyway!

    All living things need stuff called 'DNA'. This stuff tells living things how to get built. But it changes fast in some living things, and slow in others. Why? My job is to figure this out.

    To do my job, I get lots of this stuff out of different animals, read it using big box full of many parts, then use computers to guess how fast it changes. Once I know how fast it changes I try and figure out why it changes that fast. By looking at the stuff in a LOT of animals, and by looking carefully at how the animals live, I have started to understand what makes 'DNA' change. So, we now know that this stuff changes a lot faster in animals that are small, have a lot of children, and die quickly.

    This is a pretty fun job. When I'm not figuring all this stuff out, I work at telling students how to do all of this too.
    Many animals live in groups larger than families. Sometimes those groups are very very large. They can be hundreds all together. I study how animals act in group. Each animal does not have a complete sense of what is going on in the group. They can only sense what they can see, hear and smell. They can only do that close around them. But the whole group, even large groups, do the right thing at the right moment. How is that possible?
    I try to understand how they do that and imagine how to build computers that can act in group in the same way. I also imagine how groups of computers and animals could work together.

    I study tiny flying animals that bite people. These tiny flying animals make some people sick. To help, I study things (like Off!) that keep these tiny flying biting animals from biting people. Sometimes these things (like Off!) Sometimes these things (like Off!) make people smell bad, make them bad to eat, or make the tiny flying things sick. I want to know what things in the tiny flying animals sense Off! and how that tells the animal that a person smells bad or is bad to eat.

    I also just want to know more about how these tiny flying animals think and eat and live and find people to bite.
    

    After high school, I decided what I learned was not enough so I wanted to do more school. So I went to a bigger, harder, more well known school to learn more about the tiniest parts that make up everything that is in the world and in space. I spent most of my time learning why they do what they do, how they get along with each other, and how they form and cause both the normal and the very cool things we see and use every day.

    And to change things up and keep my mind always interested, I also took classes in reading and writing. The books I read and movies I watched were all made by people from the cold upper part of that large area across the even larger body of water to our right. The land of blue eyes and light hair. I wanted to study their works because I grew up in the same part of the world and wanted to stay reminded of their way of life.
    

    I write stories about people who are trying to understand how the world works, or how we can all live better in the world, and the different ways they go about studying this.

    Some people study how animals live, what they eat and why they live where they live (or don't). Other people study old rocks or the wind and rain, or how people used to live a long time ago. Still other people figure out how to build things that work well and last a long time, things that help people live better lives-especially people who don't have very much to begin with.

    A lot of people are trying to figure out how we all can live without hurting the places we live, because there are more and more of us every year and the things we have done and built have already hurt these places a lot.

    I talk to all these different people and try to figure out how to write about what they are doing in ways that lots of people can understand and (I hope) find exciting and interesting. This can be hard, because these people I talk to are usually doing things that aren't easy to put into simple words, and sometimes they need help explaining what they do in simple words. Sometimes I go to where these people are working to see what they are doing in person (I like that part a lot).

    After I write the stories, I send them to the people who told me to write them in the first place, who read them to see if they can be even better stories. Once we all agree that the stories are the best they can be, the stories are put onto paper and sent out all over the place so as many people can read them as possible. Then the people who told me to write the stories give me money for my work (I like that part too).

    This work is important because the more people know about and understand this kind of work, the more we will all understand how amazing our world is, and how important it is to live in ways that hurt where we live as little as possible.

    And they're really cool stories.
    

    In the world, there are many animals who live together and also do things together, like going to places and looking for food. We know a bit how this works, but not completely. My job is to understand how exactly they do that, and especially what the way they move together has to do with whether they like each other or not (because lots of animals have friends too). I think this is a very important question, and so far not many people have thought about it.

    So I use tiny computers on the animals and big computers in the office, and the tiny computers send numbers to the big computers and I draw a bigger picture to make sense of all this (sometimes it is not so easy).

    Then I write and I talk about it, which is also a big part of my job.
    I want to find a way to help people who have brains that beat too much. We study people that have trouble in their day to day lives because of this. We also study animals that have this problem. The brain has a normal beat, but too much of a good thing can be bad. When the brain beats out of control, we want to find ways to calm it down. This might be stuff that you take, or it might be something else. We can even make brain cells beat when we want them to. Then, we put on stuff to see what it does to the brain cell, and to see whether it might be good for people to take. It's important to study people and animals, because animal work helps us find new stuff to give the sick people who have brains that beat too much. But studying people is important too, because sometimes what works in an animal doesn't work in a person.

    My world is your world. I use things like you use things. I see things as you see things. But I also see things another way; with numbers.

    Each day, I search the world for cool things that I do not understand. When I find something I do not understand, I search for numbers to help me understand, and to help you understand. Once I understand this thing, I can use this understanding for good; or for bad, but usually for good. I do this by looking forward. Not today, not now, but tomorrow, and the day after. That is right, I use numbers to guess what will happen in the time after the now; now. And I use this guess to act now so that I and everyone is happy now and tomorrow, because this leads to more things.

    The coolest thing about this, is that I can use numbers to understand pretty much everything. Things that fly. Things that roll. Things that jump. Things that breathe. Green things. Red things. Blue things. Light things. Dark things. Made up things. Real things. Things that go. Things, lots and lots of things.

    I speak numbers. I know tomorrow in numbers. At least I think I do...
    

    Most stars in the sky have their own worlds going around them. They are hard to see, for a few reasons. The space on the sky between the star and its worlds is tiny, because they are far away. And, the star is so much brighter that it hides their light. Also, the air above us makes the star's light shake and move in not-straight ways before it reaches the ground. This causes confusing pictures, even with our best light-focusing things.

    However, when a world is new, it is hot like a kitchen thing and gives off a very red kind of light. The largest, youngest other-star worlds give off enough very-red light to stand out next to their home star. We use big light-focusing things to break the light of this type of world away from its home star. Then we look at the color of the world's light to figure out what stuff it's made of, and how it came together in the first place. Some years ahead, with better light-focusing things, we will try the same thing on smaller other-star worlds which are more like the one we live on.
    

    My job is to understand how the body parts that make piss work, and why they get hurt by the force that the heart makes when it forces the blood around in the body. In the body there are two blood-to-piss-body-parts. They work by making piss out of blood using many small blood-cell-catch-things so that the blood cells stay in the body. Then the blood-to-piss-body-parts take up most of the water again so that the piss becomes strong, and the body can save water. The blood-cell-catch-things use the force-of-the-heart to push water out of the blood.

    However, the smallest of the blood-roads and the blood-cell-catch-things are not strong, and can be hurt by the force-of-the-heart. In the long run this hurts the blood-to-piss-body-parts, and make them stop working. Before they stop working they work less well for a long time. During this time they are easier to hurt in other ways. One important way is when the force-of-the-heart becomes too low, often because of lost blood, and the blood-to-piss-body-parts get too little blood. Too little blood, and too low force-of-the-heart makes it hard to push water out of the blood to make piss. You then get too much piss in your blood which makes you sick.

    At the same time, air is carried by the red blood cells in the blood and used for doing work in the body. Too little blood to the blood-to-piss-body-parts gives them too little air, which they need in order to take back water from the piss. When the force-of-the-heart is low they need to take back even more water than usual to keep more water in the blood and keep the force-of-the-heart normal. This makes the blood-to-piss-body-parts use more air even though less comes to them. Since the cells that make up the blood-to-piss-body-parts need air to live, too little air hurts them and some of them die.

    In a blood-to-piss-body-part that has been hurt by too high force-of-the-heart a sick with too low force-of-the-heart hurts more than in a well blood-to-piss-body-part. This means that for each earlier hurt the next hurt will hurt more and lead to blood-to-piss-body-parts that do not work at all faster and faster.

    Too high force-of-the-heart hurts the blood-to-piss-body-parts by hurting the blood-roads first. This hurt changes how much blood passes the blood-cell-catch-things, and how much water is taken back to the body from the piss. Doctors can keep the blood-to-piss-body-parts from getting hurt by giving doctor-stuff that makes them work less hard and by keeping the force-of-the-heart normal. When the blood-roads have been hurt a lot it is hard to save the blood-to-piss-body-parts. Is important to keep the force-of-the-blood normal as much as possible.
    

    There are bits of the ground with lots of fire. As well as fire, air comes out of these bits. This air is different to normal air. You wouldn't want to breathe this air.

    I look at how this different air changes the normal air. Sometimes I look at changes near the fire, sometimes I look at changes far away from the fire. Rain, cold, hot and wind are all important to this.

    It is hard to took at air far away from the fire. I use a computer to guess how the air changes. The computer can be good but also can be bad. I try and make it good.
    

    Lots of people have heard of 'grommets' but what do they do, exactly?

    You might know that air can move from your nose to your ear through a tiny road. You can make this happen, or it can happen because you opened your mouth very wide or moved something from your mouth down to your stomach. In some people, especially children, this little road isn't very good at letting air up into your ear. This is usually because the nose end of the road is blocked. The block happens in the very back of your nose, above the very back of your mouth, where that bit hangs down. You can see the hanging down bit if you open your mouth very wide in front of a mirror.

    The block can be the lining of your nose that's got bigger and taller, or one thing taking up space. Anyone's lining can get bigger, when they have a cold or if something bothers the lining and it changes by getting bigger and taller. Stuff that bothers the lining can be animal hair, or tiny animals that are too small to see that live in your bed, or smoke from leaves wrapped in paper. A thing that takes up space is nearly always a normal way the body fights things it doesn't want, like colds, but every now and again, and only in grown ups, it can be part of the body that is out of control and can be bad (it has the same name as a star sign).

    If the little road doesn't let air from the nose to the ear, the air inside the ear slowly gets used up and the middle bit of the ear sucks on things around it to fill up the space.

    There are two things that can happen when the ear tries to suck things in. One is that thick water can come out of the lining of your ear and fill it up, which can stop you hearing or make you have pain and need a doctor. The other is when the skin between the middle part of the ear, and the part of the ear that leads to the outside and the bit of the ear on the side of your head, can get sucked back in and this can be bad if it stays like that for many years.

    So a way to let air straight into the ear so it doesn't start sucking on things is to make a tiny cut in the skin that's between the middle ear and the outside ear, and put a 'grommet' in to hold the skin open (while you're asleep). This lets air come straight in from the outside, instead of using the road from the back of your nose that's blocked. A 'grommet' is like the thing at the middle of a roll of bathroom paper, but much much much much smaller. It falls out after a year or so, which is normal, and the doctors keep their fingers crossed that the road will not be blocked any more by then.
    

    People have lots of things but they don't always know where those things are. We fix this by helping things talk. You can't see it and you can't hear it, but they are talking. They might say  or  or  Then we write down what the things are saying and show it to you so that you know what they said. That way you know how many things you have, where they are, if any of them are too hot or too cold, or if any of them need to be fixed.

    Whatever they are made of, and whatever is around them, we help them talk. If you don't want anyone else to hear what they're saying, we make sure no one else can hear. This can be very important for when you don't want anyone to know about your things. Also, the way we do it can never start a fire, so your things can talk in all sorts of places where you might be worried about fires.
    

    My job is to study the parts of us that change our food into power that helps us live, understand what happens when people get sick because those parts don't work, and find ways to make these people better. Sometimes there are wrong letters in the directions our bodies have to change food into power. Since we all need that power to live, people can get very sick and die if their power directions are wrong. The problem is that we don't know how to fix power directions (or any directions for that matter), even if we know exactly which letters are wrong. Also, different wrong letters can make different things go wrong. In fact, so many other things can go bad when power directions are wrong, that it's hard to know where to start fixing things and because of that, we don't have many ways to help these power-sick people.

    This means we need new ways, and to find those we need to understand everything else that goes wrong when someone is power-sick. Figuring out what those other things are is very important but pretty hard, especially because we couldn't see many of them for a long time and don't know what they have to do with each other. These days it is becoming easier to see more types of things that go wrong, so we're trying to put all of them together, understand them as a whole picture, and look for what's different between power-sick people and power-okay people. Knowing how things are supposed to look can help you figure out how to get there.

    There's lots of stuff out there you can give to sick people that might make them better, but how do we know what would work for power-sick people? We can't just throw everything possible at them - so instead, we take tiny little parts of them (without hurting them) which also can't make power out of food very well. Then we try all the ways we can to fix these tiny little parts. If we find ways that work, we try to find out exactly how they work - we look at all the things they do and fit them into our picture. Sometimes this can help us understand better what happens when people get power-sick, and that in turn can show us even more ways around the problem. Our hope is that the ways we find to help some power-sick people and understanding how they work will help many other power-sick people too.
    

    Like people, free living animals get also sick. But without help from doctors, how come these animals do not always quickly die even though there are so many kinds of tiny bad guys in the world that want to live inside of and eat the animals? After all, most animals are filled with things that are important for these bad guys, things that allow the bad guys to grow in number.

    The bad guys in this story are often, but not always, tiny living things, sometimes only single cells. Let's call these bad guys the outsider cells. (Sometimes people talk about the animal as self and the outsider cells as not self, but in this story we are trying to move away from talking like that.) Parts of an animal's body and its white blood cells work together to kill those outsider cells before the outsider cells can kill the animal.

    In a way, I study a race that goes on between animals and outsider cells. The point of the race is to be fit, which, here, is word that may not mean what you think it means. Being fit means having more babies and having a long family line, both in the past and forward in time. For animals to be fit, they must not die when attacked by outsider cells. Outsider cells can be more or less fit too. For them to be fit, they must grow in number and reach new animals before the first animal completely kills them or before they kill the first animal.

    For both animals and outsider cells what it means to be fit changes with where each lives. I look at how the place an animal lives helps to form how that animal kills outsider cells. Consider this: animals that live in warm and wet places may kill outsider cells in different ways than animals that live in cool and dry places. This may happen because animals in one place live longer than animals in the other place. If an animal sees more types and larger numbers of outsider cells over a longer life, then may need better ways to kill outsider cells. Or it may happen because in one place (let's say the warm and wet one) there are more types and larger numbers of outsider cells. Then in these warm wet places animals may need better ways to kill outsider cells.

    The field in which I work is still young, but so far it is clear that different animals do respond to outsider cells in different ways. Some animals respond very quickly; others animals respond more slowly. Some animals fight very hard to kill every single outsider cell; others allow a few outsider cells to hang around before they start to fight back. All in all, the way an animal deals with outsider cells appears to be another one of many pieces (what an animal eats, where it lives, how it moves, and so on), which together make any one type of animal different from all other types.
    

    When people get older, sometimes they have problems with their heart: the blood doesn't reach the heart cells as it used to do, so the heart cells die, the heart doesn't like it, and people have heart attacks. It happens especially when people are used to not move their bodies enough, eat bad food, drink not water, smoke, ..., but not always: sometimes it happens to any body.

    Anyway, when people have a heart attack, their heart changes a little bit. Sometimes it is for good, and people are fine for a long time; but sometimes it is not for good, and people have other heart attacks, other problems as well, and die, and their friends and family are sad, very sad.

    In order to make people less sad, we try to better understand how the heart changes after a heart attack, and why sometimes it is for good, sometimes it is for bad. We hope our work will be used by doctors to better know what people need when they come to see them after a heart attack, and also to study new ways to help these people.

    In this work, we use computers a lot. Not every day computers: very big and very fast computers. They help us a lot with our problems. But the ones who help us even more are the people who had heart attacks in the past: they come back to the hospital just for us, we look into their bodies (no need to open, we take pictures from outside), and we study their heart with our computers. We are always very moved to see how kind they are with us, especially since we use their time to do stuff they don't really understand, and that will be used only in a very long time, but they trust us. Every day we work as hard as we can to make the best of their help.
    

    I help students find numbers. Sometimes, the numbers are pretending to be letters. Then, the students must use the numbers around the letters to find the hidden numbers.

    Also, there are boxes and round things. The boxes and round things also have hidden numbers. But the boxes and round things are all the same as other boxes and round things, and you use the things that are the same to find the hidden numbers. I help students see that hidden numbers are easy to find.
    When good people want to send a person into outer space, they pick a good person who knows much, is very strong and never sick. They train this person to go through hard times alone and pretend he is having all sorts of bad problems up there. What will it feel like to fly around inside a space car, having no ground to put his feet on, flying around the car with his body, as well as flying the car around in space? What will it be like to eat strange food and let go of water without the usual means? What if something breaks? Will he know how to fix it? What if he doesn't like the other good, strong people in this space car? Will he feel closer to the stars or farther away? Will he miss his home, the world? Will he go crazy thinking about his family back down on the world? These are things the good men must consider when training the strong person to make ready to leave the world for outer space.I try to understand why people think, say, and do the things they do. Sometimes, people say they do things for one reason, but really that's not true at all. People who live in different places in the world sometimes think in different ways, and do things in different ways. I watch people and ask them questions about why they they decide to do what they do, but I also watch whole groups of people for a long time to see if there are hidden reasons that I can find. Most of the time, people don't know why they do what they do.
    Right now, I'm trying to figure out why people with lots of money like to send some to people who don't have very much. They say it is because they like to help, but I want to know why they like to help. Does it make them feel like a good person? Do they want other people to think they are nice? Why do people think it is good to share money? I also want to know about the people who get the money. Does it really help them? What really happens to the money they get? How do they feel about the people who gave them money? Sometimes I think giving money helps the people giving it more than it helps the people who get it.
    I hope that my work will make sure that people who want to help can help in a way that is good for everyone. I think sharing is a good thing to do, but there is probably a good way to do it and a bad way to do it. I want to help find the good way.In the coldest time of the year many animals must find a way to live without getting so cold that they will die. Some animals have a thick hair all over their bodies. Some animals leave town and go on a long walk or fly far away to a warm place. Some small animals, the kind that jump and have no hair, live through the coldest part of the year by turning themselves into an ice block. They do this by having stuff in their blood that knows when the the air is getting warmer. When the air gets warmer, the stuff in the blood of the little jumping animals tells the blood to change from being ice-blood to being normal blood again. Once the blood is back to being normal, the small jumping animal can go back to its wet home or to its dry home.I study stuff that is used to build the powering part of a flying thing. The stuff is made of two parts. Having the two parts together makes the stuff really strong, even when it's really hot (and the powering part of the flying thing can get really really hot). The really really little things the make up the stuff move around when the stuff gets hot. Some really really little things go to the first part, and some go to the second. If I change which really really little things go into the stuff or how hot the stuff gets, the way the two parts look changes. Then I know how to make the stuff to get the best powering part for the flying thing.I help people who have brains that are different from most people's brains. Their brains learn slower because they have been hurt or because they are missing part (or have too much of) the stuff that lives inside our cells and tells our body how to work. Some of them look just the same as everyone else, but they have a harder time doing some things that other people might think are easy to do. Some of them have trouble walking or moving their bodies. I help people like this by making sure they have friends. I also show them how to stand up for themselves. We also help them find jobs. Working with people who have brains that work a different way has shown me many things.Most animals like to find food by themselves. Some like to group with others of their own kind to find food. But there are a few that group with other kinds of animals to search for food! Why do they do so? I am trying to find out. Do they find more food this way...or is it because it helps them escape other animals that want to eat them? But why group with other kinds and not with one's own kind? I am trying to find that out as well. Is it because other kinds help in ways that one's own kind can't? Or is there too much fighting over food with one's own kind? I hope to know soon.People decide what to do all the time. They don't always do a good job of deciding. However there are things they can do to decide better. I help people to do those things. People often don't think enough about what they need to decide. That is, they don't really figure out what the problem is, or what things they want. They focus too much on picking from a set of things to do. By helping people focus on the right things, the problem and the things they want, as well as helping figuring out what will happen given the things we can do, we can get more of what we want when we decide. Sometimes I use computers to help figure out what will happen given what we might decide. This is what I do, I help people decide well, especially when what they decide changes our relationship with the world and figuring out what to decide is hard.We live our life not worrying much about our well being. But animals face many problems which can lead to their death. They can be eaten by other animals, not get enough food and water or feel cold.
    There are small animals found all over the world that call in the evening. They make these noises to call the she-animal of their kind and make babies with them. But other animals also hear this call, find that animal using the call and eat it.
    I study who are these other animals, how they hear these calls and how many times are the calling animals eaten.

    I studied computers in school, and I use what I learned to make computer games. It is fun work, and I work in a cool office with cool people.

    I don't make the pretty pictures and movies you see on the computer. I make the parts that tell the computer what you can do, which pretty pictures and movies to show, what happened, and what you can do next. Most people like the pretty pictures more, so my part is not thought of as cool to work on. I like it, though. I always liked numbers, and my games use lots of numbers. Sometimes I get to use numbers in fun new ways, and I talk about it with all my work people. They never get as excited as I do.

    My games are the kind that many hundreds of hundreds of people can play at the same time as each other. They can be any place in the world-sitting across the room or across the world.

    This can be very hard. Computers are not very good at a lot of people doing different things to the same thing at the same time. I spend a lot of time making sure that the computer does not get confused about which person is doing what and who can do what. I come up with ways to keep the computer from getting confused but also keep the game fast and fun.

    We are always trying new things to let more and more people play our game. Sometimes I have to use ideas from many places to make a game work. Sometimes I make up new ways to look at how a game could be played.

    I make sure that the games are played right and that bad people can't do bad things against the game or the people. Some people are not bad, they are just mean. We make sure that mean people are not allowed to keep being mean. Mean people work hard at being mean, so I have to work harder sometimes. It is both sad that people are mean and funny when I get to stop them from being mean. Sometimes when I stop them, they call me very mean things and try to scare me. When they try to scare me, I laugh very hard.

    Sometimes my game seems not important and they are not, really. It makes me happy to give people a game to play. Sometimes I go play a game with them and ask them what they think. It makes my job great when they tell me my game is fun.
    Green things that grow need water. People sometimes give the green growing things not clean water that has bad stuff in it. Then the green growing things have bad stuff in them. Sometimes people eat the green growing things. Then the people can get bad stuff in them. If there is too much bad stuff, the green growing things and the people can get sick. I look for different kinds of bad stuff that can go from water into green growing things. I want to know how it gets there.I use very strong light of different colors to study how the smallest pieces of stuff stick together and change one another. My focus right now is to understand new kinds of stuff that might be used to make a space car go when it's in space, so we can make better, safer, space-car-go-stuff for less money.

    Start with a thick piece of hard cold stuff like we make cans out of. Take a bright hot little light and point it at the piece of can stuff. Move the light slowly over the top of the can stuff. The top of the stuff will turn get very hot and turn water like for just a minute, then will cool off and be hard again. The rest of the can stuff under the top will not get water like and will not feel the light.

    What is the top of the can stuff like after the light goes over it? Is it harder than it used to be? If yes, this might be good, because people sometimes want harder can stuff. Maybe they can get harder can stuff for less money by using the bright hot little light?

    Does the top of the can stuff now have nice little higher and lower areas like the water does when there is wind? If yes, this might be good, because people sometimes want can stuff with nice little higher and lower areas.

    What happens to the top of the can top stuff if the bright hot little light is moved faster or slower? Are the up and down areas nicer or more crazy? Can we guess what the top will be like when we do this for different kinds of can stuff? What would happen if we put the can stuff in some kind of water and then used the bright hot little light on the top? Would the top be crazy or very nice? Could we make some good guesses? What if the kind of water was different? What if the water was moving instead of quiet? What if the water was moving fast instead of slow? Can we use ideas and computers guess what the can top stuff will be like after the bright hot little light goes over it? It might be good to know what happens for different kinds of can stuff, different kinds of water, and different moving water, because it might be easier or take less money to get the top to be like you want, nice or crazy or hard. It might also help us learn more about what really happens when stuff becomes like water and then hard again, which right now is not easy to know.
    

    People tell computers to do things by writing words. To make it easier, they come up with different  for the computer. There are word-sets that tell computers to do one thing at a time, and there are word-sets that tell computers to do many things at once.

    Usually, when people start out writing words to tell computers to do things, they use the kind of word-set that tells the computer to do one thing at a time. But there are situations where it makes more sense to do many things at once. Suppose that, say, you have four books at your house and you need to take them to your friend's house. Would you want to pick up one book, go over to her house, leave the book there, go back home, pick up another book, and so on? That would be really slow (and boring), especially if you had to do it every day!

    You'd probably rather pick up all the books and take them all at once. But if you wanted to tell a computer to move the books, and you were using a one-thing-at-a-time word-set, then you couldn't do that. So it's great to have many-things-at-once word-sets, so that we can get computers to do things faster.

    But sometimes there's a problem with doing many things at once. To see why, imagine that of the four books you're taking to your friend's house, one is red and three are blue. Your friend is taking the books from you and putting them on the table in such a way that each one is on top of the next. But, suppose that when she's done, she wants the red book to be on the bottom, and the blue books to be on top of it. So, you have to be sure she gets the red book before she gets any blue books.

    If you give her all the books at the same time, maybe sometimes the red book would end up on the bottom, but other times it wouldn't. This could cause a problem later: suppose that every day, someone else is going to visit your friend after you leave, and they need a blue book from her, but all they know how to do is take the first book off the top. If that book happens to be the red one, things will go wrong.

    The worst part is that things might work fine for a while, because the book on top might happen to be blue for several days -- but one day, the red book could end up on top, and things could go wrong with no warning! Because using many-things-at-once word-sets can lead to these kinds of problems, some of those word-sets have been known to cause people a lot of pain. People usually like to be sure of what the computer is going to do when they tell it to do something, and they would rather know right away if there's a problem with the words they wrote, so they can more easily fix the problem.

    The good news is that there are  many-things-at-once word-sets. It can be shown that if you only use words from a safe word-set, the computer will act the same way every time. (To be clear, the computer might not really do exactly the same thing every time, but only in a way that people can't see. So it will look to people as if it's doing the same thing every time.) That means that if there's a problem with the words a person wrote, the problem will appear right away, and that makes it easier to fix.

    These safe word-sets are a great idea, but they can be annoying, because with every safe word-set, there are some things you can't tell the computer to do, even though those things would be safe. To put it another way, with a safe word-set, you can't write  (things that could act in different ways with no warning), but there are also  (things that will always act the same) that you might want to write, but can't.

    So, we're working on a way to make it possible to write more safe things in safe word-sets. With our way, in the case of the red and blue books, you could tell the computer something like  The computer could move the red book, and then it could move all the blue books at the same time. If it tried to move a blue book first, it would be blocked from finishing that part until the red book was in place.

    When a set of things (like books) has an order (like when red books come before blue books), we call it an ordered set. Our idea for better safe word-sets works by using order-keeping relationships between ordered sets. We noticed that other safe word-sets work that way, too. But in those other safe word-sets, the relationships are stronger than they have to be, and that's the reason why there are lots of safe things that you're not allowed to write in those safe word-sets. So, we relax those relationships in a way that will allow you to write more safe things, but still keep them strong enough that you can't write not-safe things. It's probably not possible to ever make a word-set that allows you to write all the safe things and none of the not-safe things, but our idea gets us a little closer to that.

    To me, it's interesting to think about relaxing those relationships. That's one reason why I like working on this stuff. I also believe that using many-things-at-once word-sets should be easy and fun, and I don't want people to have to be annoyed when they do it. This is especially important because there are a lot of big jobs for which we really need computers to be able to do many things at once. Having to move just four books one-at-a-time isn't so bad, but imagine moving huge numbers of books. So, our dream is to have safe many-things-at-once word-sets that are easier and more fun to use than the ones we have today.
    

    People who have money give it to people who have ideas. Then the ideas people go away and do stuff with the money. Each year, the money people ask if the ideas people have made money from the ideas. So, the ideas people tell a story of where the money came from and the things that the money bought . Now, sometimes the money people want their money back. But, instead of asking the ideas people to given the money back, the money people ask other money people to take their place. So the new money people buy from the first money people.

    Now, I want to know if the new money people have paid too much. So I look at the stories that the ideas people have told. I look at the stories to see if there can be any new things which surprise the new money people after they have paid the first money people.
    

    Long ago, people tried to understand things as they are in themselves. They worried a lot about what things do when no one is looking, what we can know about them, and how we can know it.

    We no longer care so much about things in themselves, because things are never on their own, and even if they are, we won't run into them. Rather, we care about what things do together. This is like not worrying about notes and sounds, and instead listening to the music.

    I study all possible forms that of a kind of space can have, by putting other spaces and figures inside them. I try to find all ways in which one space can sit inside another. This tells me about which forms are possible and which ones aren't.

    This kind of study doesn't have many uses yet, but that doesn't bother me. I like to imagine figures that are strange but beautiful. It's like going to a land far away.

    What sometimes makes me sad is that I can't show the beautiful things I see in my head to the people I love. I try my best to tell them what I see, but it is hard. I wish I could show them all the possible worlds that I visit.
    If we want to know how the brain makes memory and uses memory, we need to make people do things like learn stuff and then remember it. I want to know how we imagine things, and how memory makes this possible. So, I ask people to imagine things, and see how good they are with different words. Then, we look at their brains at work using a big noise box that takes pictures inside the head. We also ask people who are missing a piece of brain to also do stuff to see what they can and can't do. Then we'll know what different brain pieces do, and one day put all the pieces together to understand the mind.

    When I am at work, I study things that are in the air, but not the parts that are most of what makes up air. The things I look make up a really small part of air, like one part in a hundred times a hundred times a hundred times a hundred times a hundred times a hundred. These things that are very few and far between are made up of some of the same building blocks that make people and trees and living things. They come out of the back parts of cars, and out of the ground where we are trying to get the stuff that we burn to stay warm, and out of the leaves of trees and from the world's big bodies of water. These things go all around the world in the layer of air that surrounds the world, and by looking at these things in the air in different places, we try to figure out where the air came from, and how it changed while it was in the air, and how it changes other things that are in the air.

    What makes me really happy is that sometimes I get to look at these few-and-far-between things from a bus that flies through the air, and I get to go to places all over the world to do that. My favorite places that I have been to are near the top of the world where it is really cold and in the middle of the big body of water to the left of the place where people really like the colors red, white and blue.
    

    Where I work, we slam together small things to break them into even smaller things until we have the smallest things possible. This is how we know what matter is made of. We gave names to the smallest things in matter like , , , , and . Each of those things can be either matter or not-matter and can have three types. We use the name of a different color, either red, green, or blue for each type. So we can make a red-up small thing and that red-up-thing can come together with a green-up-thing and a blue-down-thing. But those small things can never be alone. They can't escape their groups. They are held together by a strong force.

    The small things come in groups of two or of three. The groups of three have to have all three colors, like a red-up with a blue-up, and a green-down. The groups of two have to be matter with not-matter like a red-up and a not-red not-up. Sometimes the small things can change groups and new ones can come and go in pairs: a small matter thing and its small not-matter friend thing can pop out of space.

    We are made of lots of groups of either up-things, up-things and down-things, or up-things, down-things, and down-things. That's up, up, and down grouped together, or up, down, and down grouped together. These two little groups are at the heart of almost all the matter we see.

    What we really like to do is make big groups of these small things and make them as hot as we can. Really hot. More than ten hundred hundred times hotter than the sun. We do this by slamming four hundred up, up, down, and up, down, down things together all at the same time. When we do this, they all become very hot and new small matter and not-matter things are made out of this thick hot stuff. The new small things are the same number of matter and not-matter. Light comes out of the thick hot stuff too and we can tell how hot the stuff is from the color of the light.

    Usually, the little up and down things can't escape their groups. The field that keeps them together is very strong. But when the thick hot stuff is hot enough, then the little up and down things escape from their groups and become free for a little time. Eventually the thick hot stuff grows and cools until the little things start to stick together again into groups. Those groups fly away until the thick hot stuff is gone. We catch the light and the little groups as they come from the thick hot stuff. By studying how they came out of the thick hot stuff, we learn what the thick hot stuff was like. We also learn about the strong force that holds the groups together.

    We found that the thick hot stuff is so thick it makes all the little things move together, dragging on the faster ones, and pulling on the slower ones. It's a lot like water but not like air. The thick hot stuff we make where I work is the same as what was in all of space one hundred, hundred, hundred, hundred, hundred years ago when time had just begun.

    I think I have a cool job! Please tell the people with money to keep letting me do it and I'll keep telling you about it and using what I know to help everyone as much as I can.
    I want to find out what makes people learn better. By letting them know how well or bad they did in some things, people can have an idea about their learning. To do that, I have a deep look at people's brain. When we let people know how well/bad they did, the brain responds to that. Some brain areas responds by talking to other brain areas, some talk more often, some talk less. I also train one important area of the brain. We want to see if people can learn better if that important area gets some training.

    If we want to know how stuff works we need to understand what happens inside it. Every big bit of stuff is made of smaller bits. Where the little bits of stuff sit and how they move around tells us how the stuff works.

    In our group we fire little bits of light at stuff and we check what happens to the bits of light after they hit the stuff we are interested in. By looking at where the bits of light go we can see where the little bits of stuff sit within the big bit of stuff. By looking at how the bits of light change color we can tell how the little bits of stuff move.

    People who make new things like phones, cars and houses then look at what we learned about the stuff and use it to make them better.
    In my job I take care of flies and try to make them different by putting something into flies that are not babies yet to make the babies different from their parents. I also watch boy flies try to do it with girl flies to see if they really like to do it or they like boys flies more. This happens when they can't smell something the girl flies have that makes them want to do it with girl flies or something the boy flies have that makes them not want to do it with boy flies.

    Many years ago, when people made things they put the stuff left over on the ground or in the water near them. They didn't know that some of the stuff left over could get into the ground and into the water and could stay there for a long time, or that it could move far away over time.

    Now we know that some of the stuff that was left out so long ago can make people (and animals) sick. My job is to find out how much of the bad stuff is left and where it went. Once I know that, I can take the bad stuff out or add something to the ground to change the stuff so that it won't make people sick.
    

    At my job, we go and look at places where the water and the ground are not clean. Clean water and ground keep people from a sooner death. We see how not clean the water and ground are, and think of ways to make the water and ground clean again. Making the water and the ground clean takes a lot of money and a lot of time.

    People who made the water and ground not clean do not always want to spend money to make it clean again. Sometimes we can't find the people who made things not clean. Then other people have to spend money instead.

    There are important people who need us to make the water and ground clean as part of their job, and they have ways it must be done. Sometimes the important people and the people with the money do not agree on how to make water and ground clean again. Then my job is to help both people agree so that the clean up work gets finished and there is less sooner death in the world.
    

    I live in a big, cold land at the top of the world (the one where the people are nice and say  quite a lot), but I work for the land-control-people in a small, cool land near lots of other small, cool lands (the one that has water on all sides and is known for having lots of rain, big red buses and GREAT thoughts and ideas). I do not have to change lands and offices every few years like some of the land-to-other-lands-people here do.

    I try to find ways that the thoughts-and-ideas-people can work together to get better thoughts and ideas. This means that I have to know a lot about thoughts and ideas, land control and the two lands that I work with.

    I am part of a small team in this land, and a bigger team across the whole world. Together, we help big-red-bus-land by helping it to get better thoughts and ideas. If you are a thoughts-and-ideas-person and you want to work with thoughts-and-ideas-people from big-red-bus-land then just ask your nearest land-to-other-lands-thoughts-and-ideas-person!
    

    I work for people who are finding out why some people get very sick. It is a hard problem, and although the people who are finding things out are doing well, there are still many things we don't know. I spend my time finding out about the things that they are doing, and telling everyone about them.

    We know that people get sick in this way when something goes wrong inside them and grows out of control. We need to find ways to stop this happening, but there are lots of ways that things can go wrong. Sometimes things go wrong because a person's mum or dad had something wrong and passed it on to them. But most times it's because something has happened to cause a problem.

    I think it is very important to tell everyone about the things our people are finding out, because then they might not get sick in this way. Or if they do, doctors can make them better. But finding things out takes a lot of money - if we don't have money, we can't find things out to make people better, and too many people will carry on being very sick. So we need people to keep giving us money to find out new things that will help.

    I hope that one day no one will be very sick in this way. That will be a good day.
    

    I study a flying animal that makes sounds like other flying animals. Even though it has its own sounds, that no other flying animal makes, it often makes the sounds of other kinds of animals.
    There are many flying animals in the world that make the sounds of other flying animals, but most of them do so to get she-animals of their kind to come and make babies with them. Apparently, the she-animals of some kinds of flying animals like to make babies with he-animals that sound like other animals.

    But in the flying animal that I study, both he-animals and she-animals make the sounds of other animals. So this must mean that making the sounds of other animals helps them in many different ways, not just to call each other and make babies.

    So I follow this flying animal, and see what it does when it makes the sounds of other animals. Sometimes it does this when it is looking for food, alone or with other flying animals. Sometimes, it makes those other sounds when it wants to make babies. Other times it makes sounds like other animals when it wants to keep its own babies in its home safe. And sometimes, it makes these other sounds I don't know why.

    I wonder how this flying animal learnt to use the sounds of other animals in so many different ways. And I also wonder why more flying animals did not learn to do the same.
    

    What I and some people I work with do is look at a not usual way that the smallest bits of stuff can work together. If we take a pair of these bits, sometimes we can talk about them as one bit and the other bit, and sometimes we can't; we can talk about the two bits together as one, but not the two bits by themselves. This is what we look at, and we do it because there are many cool things you can do with things that work in this not usual way like talking with someone far away without anyone else being able to hear, and making new kinds of computers faster than anything even imagined before.

    What we do is we try to find new and better ways of telling when a pair of bits of stuff is working in this not usual way. We then look at how real bits of light work together to see if these ways of telling are good enough to use in the real world.

    We know from looking at things that there is only so much we can know about either one of these bits at a given time. These end points of what we can know about a single bit of stuff can tell us about this not usual way that pairs of bits can work together.

    Looking at a pair of these bits of stuff, if we can learn more about one bit by looking at the other bit than these end points would allow, we know right away that these two bits are working together in the not usual way, and we can see this in the real world!
    

    Sometimes, the places where animals live get broken up. The animals that live in each of the different pieces start to become a little different from the animals in all the other pieces. This is not the kind of different that you can see. You can only find out how different the animals are if you look at the stuff that has the directions for making the animals. It is important for the animals in each of the pieces to sometimes have babies with animals from other pieces to make sure the animals in each piece stay well, especially if there are only a few animals in a given piece.

    I study how the space and kinds of places between the pieces (places like roads, water, places that grow things) change how different the animals in the pieces become. I am also looking at how things that only happen sometimes, like water covering large places change how different the animals in different pieces are.
    landscape genetics,Some day we will run out of stuff that makes cars go. That stuff also makes the world too hot. We can use green things to make cars go, and keep the world cool, but this takes lots and lots of green things. When we move all those green things around, we lose some. Different ways of moving things lose less than others. The less green things we lose, we can make more cars go, keep the world cooler, and make money too.

    A set of stuff to do, stuff that is done, things you have, people, businesses, letters sent or to send, or pictures of your important jobs can help your work. My job is to get computers to make easy to use and find sets of words and letters of jobs, things, stuff to do, numbers, and words so we can find and sort and understand them better. These numbers and words and pictures can be about people, places, things, jobs, times, days, months, and all kinds of stuff.
    It might sound easy, but the real work is in making those sets of words tell us things about the past, about now and about times to come. It is easy to make large sets about a few things or things we already know, but much harder when we have large sets of things, numbers, pictures, or words. Showing everything at once can be really hard.

    Computers help because they can work with the sets, and words and numbers quickly and are good at sorting and showing large sets of words. Showing first, middle, last or most and least important words or people or times or pictures or stuff or work to do or work done or letters sent in the set is fast.

    There are a lot of word sets out on the sky place, but many of them are bad in that they are hard to use and not pretty to look at . A good word set helps us to understand every day things, things to do today, and tomorrow's to do things.
    

    A man with a very good brain, about one hundred years ago, found that we needed a new way of thinking about space and time. If you move really fast (almost as fast as light), things become very strange.
    Someone who watched you (but who was not moving) would see that you had become shorter in one direction: the direction in which you were going.

    The watching person would also see that your thing that shows you the time of day was not running as quickly as a normal one does.
    There is a third kind of change too: if someone put you onto a thing that shows how heavy you are, it would show that you are now heavier than when you are not going very fast.

    However, the man said that everything else acts the same way. If you are moving past something, it is also true to say that that thing is moving past you. So you can say that you are the one who is not moving, and it is the other person who is moving very fast. Time, and how heavy one is, and how long one is, will all have the same kind of change for the other person.

    Because of this, no one can really say who is moving and who is not. You must pick one way of looking at things and say, This is how it appears to me, but not everyone will be able to see the same thing that I do (at the same time, but in a different place - or even in the same place, but at a different time).
    

    I study cells that tell you about pain in your body. I learn what makes them change and start responding either with too much or too little pain. This study may clear the road for the doctors of tomorrow, helping people that feel too much pain all the time.

    Sometimes, when you have hurt your body and your skin is between red and blue, the cells that tell your brain things like  start working outside what is normal; something that should make you just jump in normal life, now may make you drop to the floor and scream in great pain.

    I don't use people to study how this happens; I grow easy-to-grow cells in hot boxes and write changes in the cell's inner plan book to make them have children that look like pain cells and not like their parents. I also make them have children with parts of different colors, so I can see them move inside the cell when I watch them in bigger-than-real moving pictures. I put the cells in water with food and then change things that may make the cells start responding outside what is normal (a safe guess thanks to earlier work). I then take pictures and see what parts of the cell move, while touching the cell with a glass stick joined by a thinking box that shows me what the cell would say to the brain.

    Why do you feel more pain when you have a broken body? The answer is hidden inside the smallest working piece of the pain sense: a door on the pain cell wall. In normal life this door opens when is hot, and the number of small rocks in water entering the cell make it call the brain to say that you are in pain. But when you have hurt your body, even more doors move to the cell wall making entering the cell even easier. The cell then makes even more calls and the brain understands that you are having even more pain.
    As the brain has different parts, I study how some of this parts speak between them and allow us to notice in which direction a drawing moves; Then, I make a computer to get the same answers than a human from looking at a movie with a drawing moving.

    People who study the stuff that everything is made of need to know the form taken on by the smallest bits of everything. We can use computers to study these forms by taking what we know about the most simple things and using it to study groups of simple things. We know how to tell computers to figure out the form of small simple things exactly, but for larger simple things this is much harder. We need to find the best ways to get the form of larger simple things without running our computers for ever.

    I study the way that the smallest parts of these simple things play with each other. If they are close to each other, we should look at them like they are paired, but if they are far away from each other, we can think of them as not paired. Figuring out how to tell computers to think of far away things as not paired will help us find out more about the form of larger simple things than we could if we just think about all pairs as playing together.
    There are tiny order pairs inside our cells which tell the cell what to make and do. There are some things which helps make sure those orders are right. If something is wrong in the orders, some really small cell-stuff fixes the problem. I study one of those things. It pulls the orders away from their matched pair, and allows them to be eaten and made again, with great hope right this time. If not, many cells will grow fast and kill you.When people get sick they are fixed by doctors. Sometimes this is hard because doctors need to get into your body using small things moved by computers. I study how to make this better for the sick person so that everything is safer.I study things which go around and around and how water (or air) moves over the top of it when it goes around and around. If water (or air) goes over the top easily, drag force can be stopped. Maybe if the thing has a not straight top, the drag forces can be smaller!When many different types of people study the world, we get better answers to the problems that face us. Yet there are many things that stop men of color and all women from working on these problems. I study what those things are and work to find ways that we can help more and different people become the kinds of people who will help us fix the world's problems.I build things that can learn the way some people write to each other about things they care about, and can be used to help find new things to read that will be interesting to those same people.I find ways to help the spiders eat the bad bugs that eat the plants that we want to eat so we don' t have to put bad chemicals on the plants that can make us sick.

    Why do leaves fall?
    The world goes around the sun. The world leans. Sometimes it leans toward the sun. Sometimes it leans away. When the sun lights up the world, it lands in different directions. when leaning away from the sun, less light lands, because it comes from a lower direction (not because it is further away, as most think). This is why the sun is low in the sky during cold months. In fact, the cold happens because of the lean of the world. The light from the sun is power, and also warm light. This change in direction means less warm light, and the world cools on the area that leans away from the sun.

    Green leaves have green cells that turn light into sweet water. Trees, and all things live with sweet water. cold months and less light from the sun tells the trees to stop making sweet water and go to sleep. They have gotten this life from many deaths in their family. Other trees before them have had bad ideas and died early. Trees that do not die live on and show other trees how to live. Going to sleep at the right time is one good idea trees have shown their children. The green cells that turn light into sweet water go to sleep. Cells dry up and become ready to break. This means the leaves are not strong enough to hold onto the tree.

    Falling happens because stuff is heavy. Stuff pulls other stuff toward it. The world is heavy and leaves are not very heavy so the world has more pull on the leaves than the leaves have on the world. The leaves fall toward the world because of the pull.
    I study brain waves in order to understand why some children have trouble with sharing their ideas through talking. The kids I study have normal brains as far as doctors can tell, but often struggle when reading and talking. They can move their mouths and tongues in a normal way. I want to know what parts of the brain are leading to their struggle in order to find new ways to understand and help them. I use a computer to help me to study brain waves and use it to study fields of numbers to increase our understanding of these kids.

    Understanding change at the top of the world so we'll know what is going to happen later

    When we drive cars and warm our homes we give out bad stuff that ends up in the air. The bad stuff in the air makes our world warmer, which is not good. Every year there is more bad stuff in the air, and our world gets a little bit warmer. Some people pretend this is not happening, they are wrong.

    The green things that live outside suck up the bad stuff in the air that we give out when we drive our cars and use it to grow bigger. This is good because the green things are slowing down the warming of our world. When the green things die, tiny life forms in the ground eat them and return the bad stuff back to the air, this is normal.

    Up near the top of the world it is really cold and lots of old dead green things have been stuck in ice in the ground for a very long time. When the dead green things are stuck in ice the tiny life forms can't eat them and the bad stuff is stuck where it can't make the world hotter. When ice gets warmed up it starts to go away and when it does the tiny life forms in the ground can eat the old dead green things and give out the bad stuff that makes our world warmer. When the world gets warmer more ice goes away, more dead green stuff gets eaten and more bad stuff ends up in the air which makes the world get warmer, and so on. This could make the world get hotter very quickly, and we need to know more about it.

    To help work out what might happen at the top of the world years from now we are trying to understand as much as we can about the way the ice goes away, the green things that grow outside and the tiny life forms that eat them. When we know some more about this stuff we can put what we have learnt in a big thinking box (a bit like the one you are using to read this) and use it to tell us what will happen years from now.
    I study the air we breathe and try to make it as clean as possible

    When you want to move, your brain tells your body how to do so. The body has many parts, and even moving your arm from one point to another is hard. It is one of the hardest problems that your brain deals with.

    We try to figure out how the brain moves the body. The brain is made up of many, many cells that talk to each other. They do this by firing more or less to tell other cells to fire more or less. Some cells in the brain have parts that leave, and these cells can move the arms and legs and the rest of the body. We listen to the firing of some (but not even close to all of!) the cells in this part of the brain, and try to make sense of how the firing changes when you move in different ways. In this way, we can start to understand how the brain controls the body, and maybe learn something about how the brain does all kinds of other things as well.

    Some people have become sick or hurt in such a way that they can't move their bodies anymore. These people have trouble living because they can't move around or reach for anything, so they must ask their friends and family to help them with everything. We are also trying to use what we have learned about the brain to help these people. First, a doctor in a hospital can very carefully put a small thing that looks like a hair brush inside the space between the head and the brain. This listens to the firing of the cells in that small part of the brain and sends what it hears outside to a computer. Then, we have the computer learn what kinds of firing happen when the person makes each kind of reach in many directions. Then, when the person is trying to make a reach, the computer can recognize what reach the person wants to make just by listening to the cells inside the brain. Before, when the person thought about moving, nothing would happen. But now, the computer knows how the person wants to move and can move the arm for them!

    It isn't perfect yet, but it's good enough already that we can soon help people that can't move by themselves with their day to day problems. And it's getting better every day. It's very exciting to learn about the brain and help people at the same time!
    

    Computers have lots of parts inside, all put together in one fixed way by people who make computers. A computer like that can do lots of different jobs, but can not do any one job especially well.

    Maybe you have a problem that is very hard for normal computers. Your problem takes too long, or takes too many computers (which takes lots of money). You can use the parts from a normal computer, put them together in a new way, and have a different computer. If you know how, you can make a computer that does your problem a hundred times better than a normal computer does. It won't do any other problem very well, but it does your problem.

    But maybe you have two hard problems. Your new computer can only do one of them. Or maybe you change your first problem so your new computer can't do it any more. Then you need to make a new computer for the new problem.

    Normal computers have all the parts put together so you can't change them. You have to use the parts inside the way they come from the store. There are things that have all the parts of a normal computer in them, but the parts aren't put together. You can put them together any way you want and make a computer that does one problem really well. Later you can use the same parts over again to build as many kinds of computer as you want, for all of your problems. If you have a new problem tomorrow that you didn't think of today, you can build a new computer for that by using the same parts again. If you think of a better way to do your problem, you can make a new computer that does it the better way. This is what a put back together computer lets you do.

    The fun thing is that put-back-together computers keep getting bigger and faster all the time, so you can do bigger problems or do them faster. (Normal computers get bigger and faster too, but not as much as put-back-together computers.) If you are very good at making put-back-together computers, you can make them from small pieces, then use the small piece over and over until you use up all the parts in the put-back-together computer. Then, when you get a bigger put-back-together computer with more parts inside, you can make even more of your small pieces and get a faster computer very easily.
    